# Cdiff_mags
# Metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) suggest an acetate-driven protective role in gut microbiota disrupted by Clostridioides difficile

Clostridioides difficile may have a negative impact on gut microbiota composition in terms of diversity and abundance, thereby triggering functional changes supported by the differential presence of genes involved in significant metabolic pathways, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFA). This work has evaluated shotgun metagenomics data regarding 48 samples from four groups classified according to diarrhoea acquisition site (community- and healthcare facility-onset) and positive or negative Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) result. The metagenomic-assembled genomes (MAGs) obtained from each sample were taxonomically assigned for preliminary comparative analysis concerning differences in composition among groups. The predicted genes involved in metabolism, transport and signalling remained constant in microbiota members; characteristic patterns were observed in the MAGs along with genes involved in SCFA butyrate and acetate metabolic pathways in each study group. A decrease in genera and species, and relative MAG abundance with the presence of the acetate metabolism-related gene was evident in the HCFO/- group. An increase in antibiotic resistance markers (ARM) was observed in MAGs along with the genes involved in acetate metabolism. The results highlight the need for exploring the role of acetate in greater depth as a potential protector of the imbalances produced by CDI, as occurs in other inflammatory intestinal diseases.

# DNA selection and shotgun metagenomic sequencing

Forty-eight DNA samples resulting from a study by Muñoz et al., (23), stored in the Universidad del Rosario’s Microbiology and Biotechnology Research Centre’s cryobank, were selected for the present research. Samples were randomly selected in compliance with technical requirements (DNA concentration, purity and volume) and classified according to the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America and Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines (24), as described in Muñoz et al., (25). Four populations were established: community-onset CDI positive (CO/+, n=13), community-onset CDI negative (CO/-, n=14), healthcare facility-acquired CDI positive (HCFO/+, n=13) and healthcare facility-acquired CDI negative (HCFO/-, n=8). Novogene (USA, Sacramento, CA) used the Illumina sequencing platform for metagenomic sequencing of the samples (PE150, Q30>80% with 4 Gb of raw data per sample).

# Data quality and filtering
FastQC (26) and MultiQC (27) were used for assessing sequence quality; the Trimmomatic tool (28) was used for filtering and cutting sequences (Q score <20, length <150bp). The Bowtie2 tool (29) was used for deleting human host reads using the reference genome reported by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (GRCh38, accession number PRJNA31257).

# Metagenomic assembled genomes (MAGs) recovery and taxonomical assignation
The metaSPAdes assembler (35) toolkit/pipeline for was used for filtering reads from the metagenomic data set. Bowtie2 and SAMtools sequencing alignment tools were used for mapping the decontaminated reads, using the MAGs as reference (30). Maxbin (31), Metabat (32) and Concoct (33) were used for binning the assemblies. The CheckM tool (34) was used for checking bin quality and the DAS Tool (35) for refining the bins. Only high-quality drafts were selected for downstream analysis, defined by Bowers et al.’s parameters (36) (completion >90%, contamination <5%) (Figure S1). The Genome Taxonomy Database Toolkit (GTDB-Tk was used for taxonomic classification (37); the PhyloPhLan integrated pipeline (38) was used for phylogenetic reconstruction, displayed in iTol v6 (39).

# Functional annotation and MAG analysis 
The eggNOG-mapper functional annotation tool (40) was used with high-quality MAG drafts for identifying clusters of orthologous groups (COGs). The COGs were grouped according to their functional category and plotted for each previously-defined working group. Prokka (41) was then used for functionally annotating the MAGs for extracting the encoding genes for the enzymes involved in SCFA metabolism, i.e. acetate kinase (ackA), butyrate kinase (buk), butyryl-CoA:acetate CoA-transferase(but), methyl malonyl-CoA decarboxylase (mmdA), lactoyl-CoA dehydratase (lcdA) and CoA-dependent propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (pduP). Each MAG’s relative abundance was determined by calculating the total number of reads mapped to MAG concerning the total number of reads in each sample (Hua et al.,)
(42). Abricate (43) was used for searching for antibiotic resistance markers (ARM) and virulence factors by comparison with the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) (updated in July 2022) (44) and the virulence factor database (updated in July 2022) (45).

# Statistical analysis
A bubble plot demonstrated MAGs quality dispersion, using the aforementioned statistical software. Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal-Wallis tests with Bon Ferroni correction were used for multiple comparisons and Dunn’s test in R studio software (46) for post hoc analysis, taking < 0.05 p-values as being statistically significant.

